# networked_value
The Age of Networked Value

The new economy is the network economy. The structure that pervades throughout the network economy is the value network. A value network can take an infinite number of forms, however, they all have these common characteristics: nodes and connections between nodes that generate value for different users of the value network. Nodes could be anything: people, cars, devices, records in a database etc. Connections between nodes can also take an infinite number of forms: someone taking a ride in a taxicab, someone calling someone on a phone, someone watching a movie, two devices connecting etc. Users and the entities being provided the value from the value network would ultimately be people. Even if a value network consists solely of non-human nodes and connections, it is ultimately humans that will be provided the value from that value network. For instance, a value network could consist entirely of computer devices and the connections between those devices. However, the devices themselves have no notion or experience of value since they are not conscious. It is the users of the computer devices that ultimately derive the value from the computer device based value network.
As it was mentioned previously, any aspect of an economy could be modeled as a value network. However, the recent innovations in information technology over the past ~100 years have enabled the creation of value networks in ways that are incomprehensibly more powerful than anything before ~100 years ago. The technologies that have enabled vastly more powerful value networks can be boiled down to an essential set of capabilities: creating, storing, manipulating and transmitting large quantities of information at near the speed of light via electricity. With this set of capabilities, which are essentially available to anyone who has access to a computer and the Internet, an explosion of value networks becomes a mathematical inevitability. The ability to discern value networks within the economy is also greatly enhanced by the capability to store information about nodes and connections between nodes in a computer database. Parts of the economy which are not neatly stored in a computer database can be much more difficult to discern through the lense of value networks. This lack of tangible, well-defined data in a database is often where economists step in and apply theories in order to explain phenomenon in any economy and where value is being generated. However, these theories are contested amongst even the highest caliber economists. Therefore, there are value networks that are well defined and other value networks that are not well defined. While there is no precise spectrum between these 2 different kinds of value networks, a well-defined value network is one in which one can make precise queries on a database to compute aspects of the nodes and connections between the nodes. If this capability does not exist, then we simply call the value network 'not well defined'. This writing is only concerned with well-defined value networks that can be queried in a database. Therefore, going forward, the phrase value network will mean a well-defined value network.
What do AirBnB, Facebook, Uber and Amazon all have in common? They are all successful businesses built on carefully crafted value networks. AirBnB connects people to rooms to rent. Facebook connects people to each other via Web technologies. Uber connects people to cars and drivers. Amazon connects people to a vast array of retail products. One hallmark of a value network in the digital age is reflected in the fact that resources, knowledge and localized opportunity cannot be captured entirely by a single hierarchical entity. AirBnB would just be another hotel business if it did not have people offer spare rooms via its site. AirBnB can offer a far greater amount of variety to its customers than a hotel chain can because the hosts that post to AirBnB can offer rooms of all sorts since they are individually owned/operated. A hotel chain must cut costs by standardizing rooms. Facebook (the company) could not possibly generate the content the billions of users of Facebook upload to its site every day. More than 50% of Amazon's products are sold by third party sellers. Amazon could not possibly manage all of the supply chains for all of the niche retail products that are sold on its site.

Anatomy of a Value Network

A value network can be modeled using a graph. A graph has nodes and edges that connect nodes. Nodes can be anything: people, electronic devices, computers etc. Edges can also be anything, but edges represent some kind of connection made between nodes. A classic example of a value network is the worldwide network of fax machines. Each fax machine is a node in the fax machine value network, and each connection between the fax machines are telephonic connections made between the fax machines. Metcalfe's Law states that the value of the fax machine value network is N^2. N^2 is the total number of connections that are possible within the fax machine value network at any given moment in time since any given fax machine can connect to another fax machine in the network. This leads to a paradox: using this formula we can deduce that the value of owning the first fax machine was 0. The reason being is that the first fax machine could connect with 0 other fax machines, and 0^2 is 0, so 0 value. Who would have owned the first fax machine then? Well, we can easily solve this paradox by pointing out that there almost certainly was not a 'first' person to own a fax machine. Fax machines are certainly complicated things to manufacture, and so the first manufacturing plant that produced fax machines surely produced more than a single fax machine in its first batch. A single corporation could have bought a number of fax machines from the first batch that were manufactured and set them up in different offices throughout the world, thereby making the value of an individual fax machine in the fax machine value network more than 0 in a short period of time.

Unfortunately, Metcalfe's Law is overly simplistic. It does not take into account the fact that different nodes in a value network can produce different amounts of value. Consider a fax machine in a fax machine value network that for some reason has a very low probability of being used, either because no one has the number to the fax machine, or perhaps the fax machine is only to be used in emergencies, or some other reason. Clearly, that fax machine is not providing as much value to the fax machine value network as another fax machine that may get heavy use. Also, just because 2 fax machines connect does not necessarily mean any value is being generated at all. A connection in the fax machine value network merely means the minimum was achieved technologically for the 2 fax machines to connect. Perhaps no information of value was actually exchanged between the fax machines.

So while Metcalfe's Law is overly simplistic, there are more sophisticated ways of evaluating the value of a value network. To begin with, a value network has 2 different kinds of value: potential value and historic value. Potential value is the value the network *can* provide in the future. In the case of the fax machine value network, you can look at all of the different possible connections that *can* be made in the future between 2 fax machines. Not all of these connections *will* be made, but they *can* be made at any time in the future. Holding all else equal, a fax machine value network with 1 million fax machines in it, has a much greater potential value than a fax machine value network with 5 fax machines in it. Historic value, of course, can be estimated by looking at all of the connections made between fax machines in the past. A fax machine that was newly added to the fax machine value network and has had no connections made with any other fax machines raises the potential value of the network, but not the historic value since historically no connections had been made, but the potential for connections to be made in the future has now gone up. As it was mentioned before, not every fax machine in the fax machine value network contributes the same amount of potential value to the network due to different unique aspects of the fax machine. For instance, how likely it is for any other fax machine to connect to the new fax machine would be a significant factor in determining its potential value in the network.
